Once you have identified a portfolio of candidate data science projects,
you must determine a relative priority for
various projects which will inform the order in which they are implemented.
To support this exercise,
I first rate all the projects on several dimensions that together make up feasibility,
impact, and likelihood of value capture.
For example, let's say I have a number of projects that I'm considering for inclusion on
a data science roadmap and I'd like to assess each of
them on various aspects that reflect their potential on the roadmap.
Let's say the first of these is a propensity model that
predicts a customer's likelihood of responding to a marketing offer.
Customer purchase behavior is directly aligned with most companies
strategic goals so we would rate this high in that regard.
Typical propensity models use data that is already gathered
by the business and often this data exists in
one or only a few different sources so the cost of this project will
likely be low and the complexity of implementing this project will likely be low as well.
Propensity modeling is one of the more promising areas of marketing.
It tends to deliver pretty regularly with relatively large benefits,
with little risk associated with such projects.
As such, we would rate this project as having
relatively high certainty of value capture and a relatively large magnitude of benefit.
Let's consider our second project now.
Let's say the business has challenges with backlogs in responding to customer requests.
Customers often email or text the company with service questions
but it takes a long time for a human to respond appropriately to those questions.
The company would like to look into developing a customer service chatbot that uses
natural language processing to automatically assess the need
represented by each message and respond to that need automatically.
How might we rate the customer service chatbot project?
First, customer service is certainly aligned
with strategic goals so we would rate that as high.
The cost of delivering a chatbot would be pretty extensive however,
it would take quite a lot of research in tuning to understand categories of
customer needs and develop the right responses to be provided automatically.
As such, we would rate the costs of this project as high.
By the same token,
complexity of implementing a system of this kind would be pretty
substantial so we would rate complexity as high as well.
Chatbots must be customized to a companies customer needs.
Developing the right responses can be a speculative exercise
so the certainty of value capture here would be relatively low as well.
If the company were able to pull it off,
the benefit would be substantial.
The company would increase customer satisfaction through
much quicker response times and could do so with lower payroll impact.
Once I've rated all the projects under consideration,
I represent the projects in a visual format that allows me to take into
consideration the project's relative attractiveness in a number of terms.
Here, I consolidate my ratings into three separate components.
First, I consider the feasibility of the project.
This is a combination of the time required to develop and carry out the project,
the costs associated with the project,
and the complexity of the project.
Second, I consider the potential business value
that the project will bring if successful.
Third, I consider the likelihood that the project will be successful.
Are there any risks that would stand in the way of the project
delivering the value we expect to see from it?
To what degree is there certainty or
uncertainty around the project's ability to deliver on its promise?